TELCODOCS#1831: Local storage overview (#73772)
openshift/openshift-docs: storage/persistent_storage/persistent_storage_local/ways-to-provision-local-storage.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="ways-to-provision-local-storage"]
= Local storage overview
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: ways-to-provision-local-storage

toc::[]

> You can use either of the following solutions to provision local storage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use one of the following solutions to provision local storage:
```
I'm not sure how prescriptive we want to be here so this is only a suggestion. I would think that we want to suggest that customers avoid colocating local storage solutions

The alternative would be
```suggestion
You can use any of the following solutions to provision local storage:
```

Let's get a second opinion from @jakobmoellerdev or @DanielFroehlich before committing this change though.

Reviewer 2: I see no reason why we should not allow multiple local storage options. Example use case: use LSO for ODF devices, and LVM for node local storage where the workload handles replication (e.g. Kafka).

Reviewer: ack. I think my second example is the correct one in that case. Do we want any sort of note around using these in parallel? `You can use multiple local storage provisioners together but it is not recommended`?

Author: Updated it to "You can use any of the following solutions to provision local storage:"

* HostPath Provisioner (HPP)
* Local Storage Operator (LSO)

> * Logical Volume Manager Storage (LVMS)

Reviewer 3: Use an attribute here?
```suggestion
* {lvms}
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> * Logical Volume Manager (LVM) Storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Logical Volume Manager Storage (LVMS)
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

[WARNING]
====

> These solutions only support provisioning node-local storage. The workloads are bound to the nodes that provide the storage. If the node becomes unavailable, so does the workload. To maintain workload availability despite node failures, you must ensure storage data replication through active or passive replication mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: The _only_ is supposed to be as close to the term it modifies as possible 

```suggestion
These solutions support provisioning only node-local storage. The workloads are bound to the nodes that provide the storage. If the node becomes unavailable, so does the workload. To maintain workload availability despite node failures, you must ensure storage data replication through active or passive replication mechanisms.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These solutions only support provisioning node-local storage. The workloads are bound to the nodes that provide the storage. If the node becomes unavailable, the workload is also unavailable. To maintain workload availability despite node failures, you must ensure storage data replication through active or passive replication mechanisms.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

====

[id="overview-of-hpp-functionality"]
== Overview of HostPath Provisioner functionality

You can perform the following actions using HostPath Provisioner (HPP):

* Map the host filesystem paths to storage classes for provisioning local storage.
* Statically create storage classes to configure filesystem paths on a node for storage consumption.
* Statically provision Persistent Volumes (PVs) based on the storage class.

> * Create workloads and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs) while being aware of the underlying storage topology.

Reviewer 3: >  while being aware of
This makes it sound like _**I**_ am aware of the underlying storage topology, which I don't think is what you mean. (I don't know if this change is correct.)
```suggestion
* Create workloads and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs) that are aware of the underlying storage topology.
```

Author: @mburke5678 
Yes, it is actually the users who are actually aware of the underlying storage toplogy. They need to be aware of this while configuring PVCs. 

@duanwei33 @gcharot 
Why is it important to mention "while being aware" in this sentence? Could you please provide more context?

Reviewer 4: The hostpath stands for the directory on a specific node when you want to restore the data in it, so the pod should be scheduled to the desired node, which means "user need to be aware of this while configuring pod/PVCs" like use "node select". 
@sr1kar99 Does this answer your question?

Author: Yes! Thanks, @duanwei33!

[NOTE]
====

> HPP is available in upstream Kubernetes. However, it is recommended not to use HPP from upstream Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HPP is available in upstream Kubernetes. However, it is not recommended to use HPP from upstream Kubernetes.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

====

[id="overview-of-lso-functionality"]

> == Overview of  Local Storage Operator functionality

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== Overview of Local Storage Operator functionality
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

You can perform the following actions using Local Storage Operator (LSO):

* Assign the storage devices (disks or partitions) to the storage classes without modifying the device configuration.

> * Statically provision PVs and storage classes by configuring the `LocalVolume` custom resource (CR).

Reviewer 4: LSO providers both `LocalVolume` or `LocalVolumeSet` as CR for provisioning.
```suggestion
* Statically provision PVs and storage classes by configuring the `LocalVolume` or `LocalVolumeSet` custom resource (CR).
```

Reviewer 4: @sr1kar99 @gcharot 
Sorry, I did not realize that. So it's okay to me if not mentioning `LocalVolumeSet` or adding the TechPreview as an annotation.

Author: As the core point "Statically provision PVs and storage classes" is already mentioned, excluding the `LocalVolumeSet` as suggested.
Thanks!

> * Create workloads and PVCs while being aware of the underlying storage topology.

Reviewer 3: Same comment here about _being aware_. I am not clear on what is aware of the underlying storage topology.

Author: In this context, being aware of the underlying storage topology means understanding the physical or logical layout of storage resources.

@duanwei33 @gcharot 
WDYT? Could you provide more context to be added here for better clarity?

Reviewer 4: See comment above.

[NOTE]
====

> LSO is owned by Red Hat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LSO is developed and delivered by Red Hat.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> LSO is developed and delivered by Red Hat.

Reviewer 5: [Per the SSG](https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#non-breaking-spaces) there should be a non breaking space in between Red Hat:
```suggestion
LSO is developed and delivered by Red{nbsp}Hat.
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

====

[id="overview-of-lvm-storage-functionality"]
== Overview of LVM Storage functionality

You can perform the following actions using {lvms}:

* Configure storage devices (disks or partitions) as lvm2 volume groups and expose the volume groups as storage classes.

> * Create workloads and request storage using PVCs without considering the node topology.

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> 
> The CSI Driver dynamically allocates storage space to the nodes in the topology and provisions PVs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The CSI Driver dynamically allocates storage space to the nodes in the topology and provisions PVs.
```

[NOTE]
====

> The upstream project for {lvms} is link:https://github.com/topolvm/topolvm[topolvm]. It is maintained by Cybozu and Red Hat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{lvms} is developed and maintained by Red Hat. The CSI driver provided with LVMS is the upstream project link:https://github.com/topolvm/topolvm[topolvm].
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.

> {lvms} is developed and maintained by Red Hat. The CSI driver provided with LVMS is the upstream project link:https://github.com/topolvm/topolvm[topolvm].

Reviewer 5: Per our [docs guidelines](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#links-to-external-websites) we can't link to external GitHub repositories (I believe for maintainability reasons, like if repo structures change). Up to you how you want to handle this, but maybe the simplest way would be to reference the project by name and hope users would know how to look it up:
```suggestion
{lvms} is developed and maintained by Red Hat. The CSI driver provided with LVMS is the upstream project "topolvm".
```

If there's any non-github doc you can link to for this project, that might be another option.

Author: Non-github doc not available for the topolovm project.
Updated as per the suggestion!

> {lvms} is developed and maintained by Red Hat. The CSI driver provided with LVMS is the upstream project link:https://github.com/topolvm/topolvm[topolvm].

Reviewer 5: Same comment as above:
```suggestion
{lvms} is developed and maintained by Red{nbsp}Hat. The CSI driver provided with LVMS is the upstream project link:https://github.com/topolvm/topolvm[topolvm].
```

Author: Updated as per the suggestion.
